by Marvin Minsky 
THIS TEXT tries to explain how minds work.
How can intelligence emerge from non-intelli
gence? To answer that, I'll show that you can
build a mind from many little parts, each mind
less by itself.
I call this scheme "Society of Mind," in which
each mind is made of many smaller processes.
These we'll call agents. Each agent by itself can
only do some simple thing that needs no mind or
thought at all. Yet when we join these agents in
societies - in certain very special ways - this
leads to true intelligence.
There's nothing very technical in this text. It, too,
is a society - of many small ideas. Each, by
itself, is only common sense, yet when we join
enough of them, we can explain the strangest
mysteries of mind.
One trouble is that these ideas have lots of cross
connections. My explanations rarely go in neat,
straight lines from start to end. I wish I could
have lined them up so you could climb straight to
the top, by mental stair-steps, one by one. Instead
they're tied in tangled webs.
Perhaps the fault is actually mine for failing to
find a tidy base of neatly ordered principles. But
illustrated by Julie Minsky
I'm inclined to lay the blame upon the nature of
the mind: much of its power seems to stem from
just the messy ways its agents cross-connect. If
so, that complication can't be helped; it's only
what we must expect from evolution's count
less tricks.
Common sense is not a simple thing. Instead,
it is an immense society of many painfully
acquired practical ideas.
If common sense is so diverse and intricate, what
makes it seem so obvious and natural? This illu
sion of simplicity comes from losing touch with
what happened during our infancy, when we
formed our first abilities. As each new group of
skills matures to work efficiently, we build yet
more on top of them, not knowing much of how
the old ones work. As time goes on, the layers
underneath become increasingly remote till, when
we try to speak of them in later life, we find
ourselves with little more than synonyms for "I
don't know."
One ought to ask, if thinking is so complicated,
then how could it all seem so simple? Is it really
possible that our minds use such intricate mach
inery and yet are unaware of it? It scarcely could
be otherwise.
Nothing that I've been taught in the last year has stuck in my mind as tenaciously as these insights into how things stick
in minds I innocently charged through a manuscript from the society of Marvin Minsky's mind and came out plastered
with burrs - little "aha!"s that wiggled deep and changed my stride. For the past ten years, Minsky has been the most
seminal thinker in artificial intelligence at MIT His research into the metastructure of thinking has been distilled into a
several-hundred-page book from which these excerpts were chosen.
This essay is excerpted from the book, Society of Mind, which will be published this summer by Simon & Schuster. Used
with permission of the publisher. -Kevin Kelly
4
SUMMER 196
WHOLE EARTH REVEW 
SUBSTANCE 
In general, we're least aware of what our minds
do best.
It's mainly when our other systems start to fail
that we engage the special systems we call "con
sciousness." Because of this, we cannot trust our
offhand judgments about which of the things we
do are simple and which of them require com
plicated machinery. Each portion of the mind
can only sense how quietly the other portions do
TASTE 
STRUCTURE
$ ~-- 
Consider two different stu·atons. In the frt case, I bold up an
apple nd ask, "What I this?" In the second cae there I no apple
on the scene and I ask Instead, "What do we coll those ro 
round,
thin-peelbdfruts?" Both tmes you end up with an apple-tought.
We have agents that recognize a certain kind of state of mind or- If we dare to use te phrue - a certain combination of Ideas.
their jobs.
The Investment Principle: Our oldest ideas have
unfair advantages over those which come later.
The earlier we learn a skill, the more methods we
can acquire for using it. Each new idea must then
compete, all unprepared, against the mass of
skills the old ideas have accumulated.
This is why it's almost always easier to do new
things in older ways, instead of starting fresh.
Each new idea, however good in principle, seems
alien and awkward till we master it. The old
ideas keep gaining strength; the new ones rarely
can catch up. And then those older, well-deve
loped skills will tend to spread to other worlds
of thought in which they do not really work so
well - but are just good enough to keep better,
new ones from forming at all. In the short run, it
is usually easier and better to use bad, old ideas
than to start afresh.
Isn't it amazing that a mind can grow, yet keep
on working while it's making changes in itself?
How do we do it? A mind can't simply shut
down work and say it's "closed for renovations."
How can we stay alive and well while vital parts
are being modified? One way human institutions
cope with change is by assigning managers to be
responsible for getting important jobs done. And
we expect those managers to maintain flexibility
by keeping open good alternatives by making
several workers interchangeable. Then, while one
is being changed or trained, another can be made
to do its work. If this is done at every stage, then
we can even change the managers. This is one
reason we build pyramids of power and author
ity, both outside and in the mind.
It is an old idea that brains are made of oppos
ing hierarchies. The ascending system must com
press large amounts of low-level information into
simpler, more meaningful representations, so that
those million-featured pictures on our retinas can
lead to nemes [thought units] for apples and
chairs. The descending system must convert terse
instructions from higher levels into multitudes of
more specific signals for smaller agents, as when
your wish to walk across a room must cause a hun
dred muscles to pull in a hundred different ways.
People often ask, "Could a machine ever be con
scious?" I'm often tempted to ask back, "Could
a person ever be conscious?" I mean this as a
serious reply, because we seem so ill-equipped to
In this sense, both pyscal and mental object could engage
simlar nprnentatons and procss.
understand ourselves. That in itself is understand
able: most of our evolution came long before our
brains became intelligent enough to start to know
themselves. They still don't seem to have good
ways to reach the records of their own activities.
How much genuine self-insight is possible for
us? I'm sure our memory machinery provides
some useful clues, if only we could learn to inter
pret them. But it is unlikely that one part of the
mind could ever obtain complete descriptions of
what happens in the other parts because, it
seems, our memory-control systems have too lit
tle temporary memory even to represent their
own activities in very much detail.
To "know thyself" more perfectly might seem to
promise something powerful and good. But there
are fallacies concealed behind the happy thought.
No doubt, a mind that wants to change itself
could benefit from knowing how it works. But
then, such knowledge might as easily encourage
us to wreck ourselves - if we had ways to poke
our clumsy mental fingers into the tricky circuits
of the mind's machinery. Could this be why our
brains force us to play those games of mental
hide and seek?
Just see how prone we are to risk experiments
that change ourselves; we're drawn irresistably to
drugs, to meditation, music, even conversation 
all powerful addictions that can change our very
personalities. Just see how everyone's entranced
by any promise to transgress the bounds of nor
mal pleasure and reward.
In ordinary life, our pleasure systems help us
learn - and, therefore, to behave ourselves - by
forcing checks and balances on us. When "enough
is enough," they saturate and satiate.
But when we seize control of them through per
verse tricks that break those bounds, then we can
reproduce the pleasure of success, yet freed, from
any need for socially approved accomplishment.
And that's the end of everything.
Then, what prevents such meddling? Our minds
are bound by many sorts of self-constraint. For
one, it's hard to see inside the mind. And even if
our inner eyes could see what's there, I think we'd
find that many of the agents we'd most want to
change would be among the harder ones to change,
^Apphle-nm.
27 GATE FVE ROAD SUSAUTO CA 9496S
5
the ones which first, in infancy, helped form
and shape our longest-lasting self-ideals.
The reason these are hard to change comes from
their special evolutionary origin. For the long
term stability of many other mental agencies
depends on a certain sluggishness of our images
of what we ought to be like. Few of us would
survive if, left to random chance, our most
adventurous impulses could freely tamper
with the basis of our personalities.
In real life, you often have to deal with things
you don't completely understand. You drive a
car, not knowing how its engine works. You ride
as passenger in someone else's car, not knowing
how that driver works. Most strange of all, you
drive yourself to where you work, not knowing
how you work, yourself.
But how do we ever understand anything, really?
Almost always, I think, by using one or another
kind of analogy. And what is that but to pretend
that each new and alien thing we see resembles
something we already know. Whenever a new
thing's internal workings are too strange, com
plicated, or unknown to deal with directly, we ex
tract whatever parts of its behavior we can com
prehend and represent them by familiar symbols- that is, in terms of familiar things that seem
to act in similar ways. This way, we make each
novelty appear to be like something we've known
before. It is a great idea, that use of words and
symbols, icons, images, and names. They let our
minds transform the strange into the
commonplace.
This then is the point of consciousness: it is a
part of the mind that is specialized for knowing
how to use other systems which lie hidden in the
mind But it is not a specialist in knowing what
those systems actually do, inside themselves.
Thus one walks without much sense of how it's
really done. It's only when those systems start to
fail to work so well that consciousness becomes
engaged with small details. That way, a person
who has sustained an injured leg may start, for
the first time, consciously to make theories about
how walking works: "To turn to the left, I'll have
to push myself that way" - and then one has to
figure out, 'with what? Actually, we do not often
reflect on how our minds solve their problems. I
suspect that it is mainly in those moments when
we recognize that we're confused that we call up
what little knowledge we have about our strategies
of thought. Then we find ourselves saying things
like this:
"Now I must get organized. Why can't I concen
trate on the important questions and not get
distracted by those other inessential details?"
Paradoxically, it is very smart to realize that one
is confused - that is, in contrast to being con
fused without knowing it. For then we can apply
6
all our intellect to altering or repairing the defec
tive process.
If our internal mental agents can't communicate,
how is it that people can, in spite of having dif
ferent backgrounds, thoughts, and purposes? The
answer is that it is easier for people than for
mental agents, because each person knows much
more than any smaller portion of that person's
mind. Besides, we overestimate how well we ac
tually communicate. We may seem very different
from one another in many regards, yet many of
our concerns are based on common knowledge
and similar experience. This means that we do
not really need to tell each other as much as we
suppose. Often, when we "explain" something,
we merely show some examples of what we
mean, and some non-examples; these indicate to
the listener how to link up various structures
already known. In short, we often just tell
"which" kind of thoughts to think, but not
"how" to do it.
It would be wonderful to never make mistakes.
One way would be to generate such perfect
thoughts that none of them are ever, wrong. But
such perfection can't be reached. Instead we can
try, as best we can, to recognize our bad ideas
before they do much harm. So we can imagine
two poles of self-improvement. On one side we
can try to stretch the range of the ideas we
generate: that leads to more ideas, but also to
more mistakes. Then, on the other side, we try to
learn not to repeat mistakes we've made before.
We know that all societies evolve prohibitions
and taboos to tell their members what they
shouldn't do. That, too, must happen in our
minds: we build up banks of memories to tell
us what we shouldn't think.
Serious learning tends to change the ways we
reach our goals. Humorous learning tends to
change the goals themselves.
Our culture regards humor as a pleasant but
pointless luxury we do not really need, a thing
detached from practicality. Actually, humor has
an important, practical function in helping us
learn to suppress certain ways of thinking. It
censors thoughts.
Humor as a censor would explain why humor is
so often concerned with prohibitions and mis
takes. Our most productive kinds of thinking are
precisely the ones that are most liable to error.
Careful, logical thinking can sometimes be made
relatively error-free, but then it rarely leads to
powerful new ideas. Much more can come from
working with analogies and metaphors. The pro
blem is, analogies are often wrong, and
metaphors can easily mislead. That's why so
many jokes are based on recognizing com
parisons that are inept or inappropriate.
Why is it so hard to see that humor plays such
,tr
WHOLE EARTH REVIEW SUMMER 1986
vital roles? Because, I think, it has a funny side
effect: when humor turns off other thoughts, it
also shuts off thoughts about itself - and thus
becomes invisible.
We like to think of memories as though they
could restore the things we've known in the past.
But memories can't really bring things back; they
only reproduce some fragments of our former
states of mind, when various sights, sounds,
touches, smells, and tastes affected us. But then,
what makes some recollections seem so real? The
secret is that real-time experience is just as in
directl The closest we can come to apprehending
the world, in any case, is through descriptions
which our agents make. In fact, if we inquire, in
stead, about why real things seem real, we'll see
that this depends, as well, on memories of things
we've known before!
For instance, when you see a telephone, you have
a sense, not only of the aspects you can see - its
color, texture, size, and shape - but also how it
feels to hold it to your ear. You also seem to
know at once what aelephones are for that you
speak into it here, listen there; that when it rings
you answer it; that when you want to call, you
dial it. You have a sense of what it weighs, of
whether it is soft or hard, of what its other side
is like - although you haven't even touched it
yet. Those apprehensions come from memories.
Whenever you "get a good idea" or solve a prob
lem or have a memorable experience, you activate
a K-line to "represent" it. A K-line is a wirelike
agent that attaches itself to whatever mental agents
are active when you solve a problem or have a
good idea.
When you activate that K-line later, you arouse
the agents attached to it, pulling you into a "men
tal state" much like the one you were in when
you solved that problem or got that idea.
Because so many of the same agents are active
again, you should now find it easier to solve
similar kinds of problems!
In other words, we "memorize" what we're think
ing about by making a list of the agents involved
.in that activity. Making a K-line is like making a
list of the people who came to a successful party.
Here is another image of how K-lines work, sug
gested by Kenneth Haase, an MIT student who
had a large influence on this theory.
"You want to repair a bicycle. Before you start,
smear your hands with red paint. Then each tool
you need to use will end up with red marks on it.
When you're done, just remember that red means
"good for fixing bicycles"! Next time you fix a
bicycle, you can save time by taking out all the
red-marked tools in advance.
"If you use different colors for different kinds of
jobs, some tools will end up marked with several
different colors. That is, each agent can become
27 GATE FIVE ROAD SAUUTO CA 94965
R Ikmp wrythhn w i 
doe to the a 
the frst plac. That wa, our kuwried 
ants 
whkih mn It In
kcoma ma to reac
and ew to un. T I b bued oa the od of a type of aer t caled
a "!nowkdte-lhe" or "K-Ma," for Ahort
K
K- 
t
KelM m*tteW 
to nmy Awts.
K-ie attachrd to three K-IIbw
attached to many different K-lines. Later, when
there's a job to do, just activate the proper K-line
for that kind of job, and all the tools used in the
past for similar jobs will magically become
available."
This suggests a way to make our machine learn
to do this job more quickly and easily: we can
build a memory that simply keeps a record of
which lower-level action-agents were activated
during the "Trans-action." So, when we play that
sequence back, this "trans-script" would put a
second apple in that pail - without invoking any
higher-level agencies at all.
We could call this "learning by rote" or doing
things so automatically that one can think of
other things at the same time. When such a script
can work at all, it can work very fast because it
has no bureaucracy. But rote-learned skills have
serious limitations. They are inflexible because
they can work only in narrow ranges of condi
tions - precisely because they lack bureaucratic
7
3,7
superstructure They have no higher-level anchor
points to use to call for help when anything goes
wrong. Because of the lack of hierarchy, there is
no place to appeal when an agent gets into
trouble.
When someone says "John threw a ball," you
probably unconsciously assume some certain set
of qualities of color, size and weight. These are
your assumptions by default. They might be
derived from some ball you owned long ago or,
possibly, your newest one. But since such op
tional details are usually too weak to hold
against the sharp insistence of reality, other
stimuli will find them easy to detach or otherwise
adapt. Defaults don't make strong images, and
when they turn out wrong, we aren't too
surprised.
But why use defaults at all, instead of simply see
ing what's really there? Because, unless we made
assumptions, the world would simply make no
sense. It would be as useless to perceive how
things "actually look" as it would be to watch
the random dots on untuned television screens.
What really matters is being able to see "what
things look like" - and this is why our brains
must have special machinery for representing
what we see in terms of artificially distinct "ob
jects" or "things." For the very idea of an object
embodies many assumptions we make that "go
without saying" - that an object has substance
and boundaries, that it existed before we saw it,
and that it will remain afterwards - in short,
that it will act like most other things. For exam
ple, we never see all sides of an object at once,
yet we always assume that their unseen sides exist.
Perhaps the larger part of what we know is rep
resented by default assumptions, since there is
so little we know with perfect certainty.
We use default assumptions in personal rela
tions, too. How does the writer's craft evoke such
lifelike characters? It's ridiculous to think that
people could be well-portrayed in so few words.
Instead, our writers use phrases which activate
great networks of assumptions that lie already in
their readers' minds. It takes great skill to create
WORLD 
A-BRAIN
B-BRAIN
There I one wy for a mind to wtch itself, and yet still contem
plate what's happening. Dvlde tl: brain into two parts A ad A
Connect the A-brl's inputs and outputs to the red world - so
It 
a 
sense what happens there But don't connect the B-braln to
the outer world at al; Intead, connect It so that the A-brain Is
the -brain's world!
those illusions - to activate unknown processes
in unknown readers' minds and to shape them to
the writer's purposes. Indeed, in doing so, a
writer can surpass reality. For, although words
are merely catalysts for starting mental processes,
so, too, are real things: we can't sense what they
really are, but only what we see them to be.
It is not only a matter of language, this ability to
simplify or encapsulate other mental processes.
We also use this ability to "conceptualize" 
that is, to treat ideas as though they were objects- in other areas of thought. Suppose one
manages to solve a hard problem after a long
and painful search. If we can apply our powers
to treat the steps of what we did as though they
were parts of an object, then we can "think"
about what we did and reassemble the parts that
"helped" into a new structure which will do what
the old one did, except with much more speed
and with much less thought.
An explanation of the difference between older
and younger children was first proposed by
Seymour Papert in the 1960s, when we first
started to explore "Society of Mind" ideas. Most
previous theories had tried to explain Piaget's ex
periments by suggesting that children grow new,
different kinds of reasoning as time goes by.
That certainly is true, but the importance of
Papert's conception is in emphasizing that it is
not merely the ingredients of reasoning that mat
ter, but how they're organized: a mind cannot
really grow very much by only accumulating
more and more new knowledge. It must also
develop new and better ways to use what it
already knows. That principle deserves a name.
Papert's Principle: Some of the most crucial
steps in mental growth are based not simply on
acquiring new skills but on acquiring new admin
istrative ways to use what one already knows.
Somehow, each child learns better ways to learn.
But it is very hard to guess the nature of those
strategies only from watching what the child
does. The problem is that those "learning-learn
ing" strategies are twice removed from behavior.
If it is hard to guess how our A-brains produce
our observable behavior, it must be more than
twice as hard to guess how our B-agencies learn
to train our A-agenciesl Perhaps, in order for a
child to become unusually smart, its B-brain
must experience a "lucky accident" - the kind
that focuses a hidden but persistent interest upon
the process of learning itself. It so, then perhaps
a major concern for education should be to find
out how to get children less concerned with solv
ing particular external problems and more involved
in learning better how to learn.
Imagine a simple brain composed of separate
"proto-specialists," each concerned with some
important need, goal, or instinct like food,
WHOLE EATH REVIEW SUMMER 
8
1986
drink, shelter, reproduction, or defense. On one
side, there must be administrators to resolve con
flicts between those separate specialists, so that
they can work together to control a single body
without becoming engaged in paralyzing con
flicts. On the other side, each specialist needs
ways to use the knowledge that the others gain to
fuse the the system together. In animals with
limited abilities to learn, a loosely-knitted league
of almost separate agencies with almost indepen
dent goals might be enough to survive in a
suitable environment.
But human minds don't merely learn new ways to
reach old goals: they also learn new ways to
learn new goals. If we did that without con
straint, we'd soon f !l prey to accidents - both
in the world and in the mind. At the simplest
levels, we need protection against accidents like
learning not to breathe; at higher levels we must
not acquire lethal goals like learning to suppress
our other goals entirely - the way that certain
saints and mystics do. What sorts of built-in self
constraints could guide a mind toward goals that
won't destroy itself?
No possible inheritance of built-in genes can tell
us humans what is good for us! For, unlike all
other animals, we build for ourselves the worlds
of problems that we face. Then what could teach
us what is "good," if our values change from
each generation to the next? The answer is that
our goals must be constrained, not by our genes,
but by our social heritage - and that's exactly
how we work. Unlike the other animals, we each
must learn our goals anew, from one another,
through our traditions and cultures. But still the
question remains: what mechanism leads us to
do that? How could machines that are built by
genes help transfer sociocultural goals - without
the least idea of what they are? This is done in
indirect but specific ways - by exploiting what
we call affection, attachment, and love.
Thus our earliest emotions have roots in the
machinery through which our original, inborn
proto-specialists control what happens in our
brains. But soon our cultural surroundings begin
to work to overrule those built-in schemes and
start to try to teach us what we ought to feel.
First our parents, then our teachers and friends,
and finally our own self-ideals try to impose on
us their rules for how to use the mixed-up rem
nants of those early states; they teach us how and
when to let each kind of emotion-sign show. By
the time we're adults, our own expression-systems
have become too complicated even for ourselves
to understand. What's more, once we have passed
through all the stages of childhood, our grown
up minds have been rebuilt too many times to
clearly remember or understand what infants
feel. We're too far removed to be sure that our
sympathies, however strong, are authentic
Yet how could all these steps and stages lead to
any sense of unity? Why wouldn't they, instead,
lead us to feel more fragmentary and dispersed?
I think the secret is that when each new stage's
work is done, its structure still remains available
for further use. Then those remnants of our
previous selves supply our personalities with a
powerful resource: for whenever one's present
mind becomes confused, it can exploit those
stored-up, earlier minds to try old ways to manage
things. Although those older selves may not have
been so smart, they had much more experience
and found many useful ways to cope.
Yet, on the whole, the present personality is
almost wholly unaware of this; it has no sense of
what it owes to older personalities, because it
cannot share their conscious thoughts. And so
we just imagine that we have an everpresent Self- a sort of ghostly person-friend inside the
head, whom we can always ask for help.
e
s^·Xsne~ 
All 
l
FArrAMCei run
OF GROWTH 
E TEA<
^EARN ?^,4
Overlapping stages
How could an early stage teich anytbbg to a later one, when It
knows less than I student does? As every teacher know, this iS
not U hard as It might seem. For one thing, it I usually easier
to recosnl 
a solution to a problem than to dscover a solution.
A teacher need not know bow to solv a problem, to be able to
rewrd a student for doing so.
What could be the biological and psychological
purposes of the complex, unconscious self
images which grow inside our child-minds?
The answer seems quite clear to me: that's how
Selves startl Consider that our models of
ourselves are so complex that even adults can't
explain them. Surely no fragmentary infant mind
could know how to build such a complicated thing
without some model to base it on. We aren't born
with built-in Selves - but, fortunately, we do
arrive with built-in human caretakers. And then,
our ancient attachment mechanisms force us to
focus on our parents' ways, to construct crude
images of what they want us to be like. Then,
stage by stage, those simple models grow until
they lead powerful, coherent policies of thought.
This is how the values and goals of a culture are
passed from each generation to the next. It is not
the same as the "ordinary" kinds of teaching
based on signals representing failure or success.
Instead, our children learn their deepest values
under the influence of attachment-related signals.
This is why, when we maintain our standards, we
feel virtuous rather than merely successful and
27 GATE FIVE ROAD SAUSAUL CA 9496S
9
why when we violate those standards we feel
shame and guilt rather than mere disappoint
ment. These kinds of emotion are not the same,
because they're wired differently.
Why should mental growth proceed by anything
like steps at all? Why can't we grow by steady,
smooth development?
There are many reasons why it is easier to con
struct large, complicated things in separated
episodes. They are much the same reasons why
all large corporations have divisions and depart
ments, and why all complicated living things are
divided into organs.
Splitting structures into parts makes them easier
to build, maintain and change,
It is always a dangerous experiment to make
changes in things that work. What if the new
way seems better at first, but later shows some
serious flaws - can we get back to where we
were? One way might be to keep such complete
records that we could "undo" all the changes
we've made. But what if those changes caused
our quality of thought to become so poor that
we could no longer recognize how poor it had
become? A safer way would be to keep that older
mind intact and build a new one close to it. Then
we can use that "previous stage" not only as a
"backup" to use if the new one fails, but also
to evaluate the new one's performance.
Indeed, one very conservative strategy would be
not to permit the new stage actually to take con
trol until it demonstrates the ability to out-per
form its predecessor. In that case, an outside
observer would see "plateaus" followed by sud
LEFT- 
BRAIN
&
FRAT
BRAIN
If yo aree that each peon has both a ft-brain mind ad
riht-brin mind, thea you ut abeo 
u 
s 
ba a front-brain mind ad a back-bsr 
e 
that c ch peroe also
mind To undertand
wha we call the Self, we'1 need to understand what Selvm ae
for. One function of thb Self I to kep u from chantinl too
rpldlJ I1f wel 
chlaned our minad too recklesly, we could never
know what we might wat next. We'd never set much done
aum we eould ever depend on ourselves
10 
den spurts of growth. Yet'that could be illusory,
for the "silent period" might actually conceal the
new mind's time of fastest growth. The best part
of this scheme is that it permits the person to
continue to function while growing - to main
tain "business during renovations." For the
"working version" can hold still, while the new
one catches up and gets ahead.
It can make sense to think that that there exists,
inside your brain, a society of different minds.
Like members of a family, they can work
together to help each other, each still having its
own mental experiences that the others never
know about. Several such agencies could have
many agents in common, yet still have no more
sense of each other's interior activities than peo
ple whose apartments share opposite sides of the
same walls. Like tenants in a rooming house, the
processes that share your brain need not share
one another's mental lives.
If each of us contains several such mini-minds,
could any special exercise help put them all "in
closer touch"? Certainly there are ways to
become selectively aware of processes which are
not usually conscious at all. But as for becoming
aware of everything that happens in one's mind,
that surely would leave no room for thought.
As far as I'm concerned, the so-called problem
of "body and mind" does not hold any mystery
at all:
Minds are simply what brains da
Whenever we speak about a mind, we're simply
speaking of the processes by which our brains
proceed from each state to the next state. And
this is why minds seem so separate from their
physical embodiments: it is simply because
nothing can affect that state-siccession except
the connections that govern how each agent
changes its state - and thereby causes other
agents to change their states.
In earlier times, we could usually judge machines
and process by how they transformed raw
materials into finished products. But it makes no
sense to speak of brains as though they manufac
ture thoughts the way factories make cars. The
difference is that brains use processes that
change themselves - and this means that we
cannot separate such processes from the products
they produce. In particular, our brains are usual
ly engaged in making memories, which change
the ways we'll subequently think.
Because of this, we cannot trust our common
sense judgments about "thinking machines."
Even our technical, scientific theories about such
matters are still embryonic, since the whole idea
of self-modifying processes is relatively new .to
science.
The principal activities of brains are making
changes in themselves. *
WHOLE EAIH REVIEW SUMMER 19t6
SPECIAL INAUGURAL REPRINT ISSUE: INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT TOOLS
AND IDEAS Whole Earth Review Dedicated to the Incoming Administration 20 January
1996 - Link Page
Previous The World Information Economy (interview by Stewart Brand) (Winter 1986)
Next Etiquette for the Age of Transparency: Public Access to Public Monitoring From Space (Spring 1986)
 
Return to Electronic Index Page
